Reviewing a CS conference paper

Reviewing a conference paper is a non-trivial task.  Often, reviewers
have to read and review more than one paper, and usually under a
tight time deadline.  Regardless, there is a right way to review
a paper, and many wrong things.  This document contains my thought
on the "right way", and points out several mistakes that many (or
even most) reviewers make.

The following is a list of principles to use; I'll elaborate on
each of these below:

    1. Review the paper
    2. Review to accept papers
    3. Don't demand too much
    4. Write a review
    5. Note little things, but don't make them your review
    6. Things to avoid

Much of this is subjective and is based on my reviewing experiences
(from both sides) in Computer Graphics and Geometric Modeling. 
Things may differ in your area, and you may have a different opinion.
Feel free to send me email about this, although please apply the
criteria below when composing your message.

Stephen Mann
April, 2009
===========

1. Review the paper

    This may sound obvious, but it's harder to do than it sounds.  The
    grossest violation of this principle are the reviews that say "the
    authors should have done this instead."  But your review should not
    be about what should have been done; rather it should be a critique
    of what they authors actually did.  If you feel the authors should
    have done something else, accept the paper and discuss it with them
    at the conference.

    But reviewing the paper is hard for an important reason: usually,
    the authors are too close to their work, and thus have difficulties
    stating precisely what they did, why it's of interest, and why it's
    important.  "Reviewing the paper" means reading to a level that you
    understand what the authors did, why it's interesting, and why it's
    important.  As part of your review, you should note these things.
    And you should accept or reject the paper based on whether you
    think the *contribution* is significant enough.  If you think the
    paper is poorly written, or the contribution is poorly described,
    state that, but do not make it your basis for rejecting the paper.

    This rule is usually violated because reviewers are overloaded
    and under time pressure.  A poorly stated result may be hard
    to tease out of the paper, but if you're not going to take the
    time to do so, then you shouldn't be reviewing the paper, and if
    you don't have the time to do so, you need to reduce your reviewing
    load.

    [NOTE TO AUTHORS: to help ensure that reviewers can determine what
    you did, etc., spell it out.  Mention it in the abstract; state it
    in the introduction; and restate it in the conclusions, where you
    should link back to the body of text to support your statements.]

2. Review to accept papers.

    When you read a paper, try to find reasons to accept the paper.
    If nothing else, if you're following the first principle (Read
    the paper), you should spot what is good about the paper and
    highlight that in your review.  If you don't like the approach,
    fine, but try to decide what about the authors paper makes it
    acceptable for publication.  Yes, not all papers are worth
    publishing, but almost all papers have an idea that the author
    is promoting and you should review to accept that idea.

    Sometimes the idea is bad/wrong/already-been-done.  And that's
    fine - the paper can't be accepted.  But read the paper looking
    for a reason to accept it, and don't reject it unless that
    reason doesn't exist.

    And sometimes an idea is clearly half-done.  The temptation is
    to reject the paper with the recommendation that it be resubmitted
    when the research is complete.  But often it's the idea itself
    that is the research contribution.  And if it's a good idea,
    then consider accepting the paper on that basis.  This becomes
    particularly important when you realize that a lot of research
    is done by graduate students, and papers submitted on their
    work may be all that ever gets done on it.  By rejecting a great
    idea because it wasn't perfectly polished, the idea may never get
    published despite being worthy of publication, since that student's 
    work is done.

    Related to this is when you write your review, write with the
    mind set "how to improve this paper" rather than "here's a list
    of things that are wrong with this paper."


3. Don't demand too much

    The paper is a conference submission, and there are page limits.
    Don't write a review saying "the authors should include the
    following", where "the following" would push the paper well past
    the page limits.  If there is something so critical that it
    MUST be included, suggest something to remove/reduce so that 
    the authors can kept to the page limits.

    Likewise, don't demand any additional work that can't be done in 
    the time between acceptance notification and the final submission
    deadline.  While analysis can sometimes be redone, it's unlikely
    that another experiment can be run or significant code can be
    written.

4. Write a review

    Review forms have check boxes, and there is a temptation is 
    rely on the check boxes with minimal comments.  But your 
    written comments are really the important part of your 
    review, and you should write comments that help both the
    program committee and the authors.
    
    In particular, be sure to cover the following in your written
    comments; some of this material will be in response to questions 
    on the review form, but regardless it should all be covered
    somewhere in your review:

	1. Outline the paper.

	2. Highlight the contribution of the paper, both what
	   the authors perceive it to be and what you perceive
	   it to be, as well as how significant it is.

	3. State your recommendation and why.

	4. State ways to improve the paper, but don't ask too
	   much (see both the previous and next sections).
    
    The first forces you to reread the paper, which helps in writing 
    your review.  The second is the hard part: you need to figure out
    what the authors think is their contribution.  The 3rd is one
    that the program committee will focus on.  Of these four, the 2nd
    and 3rd are the important ones.


5. Note little things, but don't make them your review

    "The authors should include the following references."

    "The grammar needs to be improved."

    "The figures are poor quality."

    No paper is perfect.  There will be details that are wrong, often
    of the above variety, but sometimes of a bit more substance ("the
    authors give the wrong formula for X").  These are not reasons
    to reject a paper (although if you can NOT read a paper because
    the grammar is terrible, you have no choice but to reject it for
    that reason).  Again, focus on the contribution and base your
    recommendation on the contribution and not the writing details.

    You should note the small things, but ideally place them at the
    end of your review in a separate section as "details to improve".

6. Things to avoid

    Here's a list of miscellaneous things to watch out for in your
    reviews.

    A. Do not say "the authors should add additional references on X"
	without actually listing those references.  If you're enough of
	an expert to make the judgement, then you should be enough of
	an expert to explicitly list those references and state why
	they should be added.  In particular, since there is a page
	limit, the bibliography should be focused on the most relevant
	work, and not be a complete survey of the topic.  So if you
	think a paper should be cited, give a strong reason as to why,
	since potentially the authors know of the reference and
	decided not to list it for their own reasons - your argument
	to include the reference should be strong enough to convince
	someone who has already decide to not include it.

	And NEVER, NEVER, NEVER reject a paper because it omitted
	references!  Don't even HINT at rejecting a paper for this
	reason.  This may sound obvious, but if you decide that
	a paper should not be accepted and in summarizing your
	reasons you mention the missing references, you have just
	hinted that you rejected the paper for missing references.

	(As a more general rule, never reject a paper for something 
	that can be fixed in 5 minutes.)

    B. Usually you get to rank the paper on a scale like 1 to 5 as
	to whether or not the paper should be accepted.  Around 2/3
	your rankings should be 1 or 5, around 1/3 should be 2 or 4,
	and you should rarely, rarely, rarely give a rating of 3,
	which should be considered a reject anyway.  If you can't 
	give a strong recommendation, then you likely didn't 
	understand the paper well enough to review it.  

	I have heard the statement "I never give a 1 because I don't 
	want to hurt the authors feelings."  That just makes "2" the
	new "1", and you won't have spared anyones feelings.  If you
	don't want to hurt the authors feelings, then do a good job
	of understanding the paper and base your decision on what
	the authors did, and write your review as "how to improve
	the paper" rather than "bash the paper".

    C. Some people will try to tell you that for some conferences,
	the conference papers are the same quality as a journal paper.  
	This is wrong for several reasons: there is usually an
	explicit page limit, and there is no chance for resubmission
	(resubmitting the paper to a future conference is different
	than resubmitting a journal paper).  The result is a lower
	quality paper than a journal paper.

	This doesn't mean conference papers are terrible, nor does
	it mean they are worthless.  Making a distinction between
	the two is important, however, since you review a journal
	submission with different standards/criteria/etc than you 
	review a conference submission.  In particular, a journal
	paper needs to be more complete than a conference paper:
	there needs to be a better literature review; there needs
	to be a more complete result; there needs to be a more
	in-depth analysis of the result.  Understanding the difference
	will help improve your converence paper reviews.

    D. Don't be insulting, be positive.  Other review guidelines
	usually state the former; I've never seen an insulting review,
	but I guess it happens.  More of a problem is being positive:
	the authors put a lot of effort into writing the paper and
	will be sensitive to (and even insulted by) criticism.  So
	phrase things positively.  In general, write your entire
	review in a tone of having accepted a paper, even when
	you're not recommending acceptance.  This will help change 
	what you subconciously write as condemning criticism to 
	helpful comments.
